# Website Installation
You must satisfy the conditions in the Requirements.md document. While this website may function with other databases or OS's, they are not officially supported.

### Test your setup first!
It is recommended that you test your setup on you local computer before hosting it on the web.  If you are using Windows, **WAMP Server** is a good test platform and easy to configure.  Use google to find it. Mac users can probably find something similar by googling **MAMP Server**.  The following instructions would apply equally to a local install except for the domain names used.

### Create a MySQL database
Create a database on your hosting platform. Name it something that makes sense to you.  You will also need the server connection information: host, user, password, and port. Please configure it to use the UTF8MB4 character set for maximum flexability to handle multiple languages.

### Clone the git repository on your server
The site is designed to deploy with a git pull command.  Due to git and linux hosting limitations, the current repo name may change once there are significate issues with the current repo.  The following uses YYYY instead of a numbered year as an example. The main README.md file will always linl to the most recent repo.

It is suggested you use the repository name as the directory name to keep things simple.  By default, Git will clone the repository into the current directory in a directory named the same as the repository.  So from a directory you want to contain the directory with the web site, you should execute the following git command at a command line prompt (substitute YYYY with the correct number):
~~
git clone git@github.com:phfui/BicycleClubWebsiteYYYY.git
~~~

### Set the Apache public directory
You will need to tell Apache to serve the **BicycleClubWebsiteYYYY/www** directory as the public directory.

### Make sure to set up HTTPS
Google will not rate your site highly if you are not HTTPS.  HTTPS is pretty much required for all websites with log in pages such as this one.

### Run the website setup wizard
When Apache has been set up correctly, you should be able to navigate to https://www.yourdomain.com/setup.php.  This will copy the appropriate .htaccess file to the public directory and launch the setup wizard.

### Connecting to the DB
The second page of the wizard it to input your DB server credentials.  The wizard will try to connect to the server.  If the connection is valid, you can move to the next page.  The wizard should, but may not, report errors, but if you can't get a valid connection, it is recommended you try to connect to your database with another program (MySQL Workbench would be a good one).  Once that can connect, you should be able to use the same credentials.

### Follow the wizard prompts
If something is required, you will not be able to continue until the problem is resolved. Most of the settings (except DB settings) can be configured in the website directly.  So they can be skipped and entered later if needed. Make sure you have a working email server set up and working. You will need to be able to receive an email to reset your password.

### Setup cron to run every 5 minutes
You will need to use crontab on linux or equivalent on Windows system to run the cron jobs. The easiest way to run these jobs is through a web browser such as lynx. Your crontab line shoud look like this:

~~~
*/5 * * * * lynx -dump https://www.YourSite/cron.php
~~~

Everytime the cron.php page is accessed, cron jobs will be run according to the hard coded scheduled times in the app.  Running cron.php more than once every 5 minutes is not really needed, but can be done. Running it more often than once a minute will simply receive and send any queued email, so no harm is done. Other jobs may be executed at specific times, but mostly the jobs send emails, or self correct the data after running, so running twice is not a problem.

[How to Schedule Tasks on Linux: An Introduction to Crontab Files](https://www.howtogeek.com/101288/how-to-schedule-tasks-on-linux-an-introduction-to-crontab-files/)

### Configure Categories and Paces
Once the website it up and running, log into it with the password you set from the Reset Password email you should have received.  You will then need to setup Categories and Paces so you can add rides to the ride schedule.

### Other configurations needed
Membership and ride leaders have additional configurations that you should check out.  Most are in the form of emails sent out at various times or for certain events.

### Setup PayPal information
The website uses PayPal to process payments. Enter the required information from your PayPal account in the Finances section.

### Add content
Add content to public pages.  Add public pages to your home page to explain the club.

### Test join and renew membership sections
The Join pages are critical in on boarding new members.  It is recommended your add content to every page in the Join section to walk user through the process. You can configure PayPal to use a sandbox account if you want to set that up to test membership renewal and joining.

