# Permission System Architecture

The permission system an opt in system. All pages (with the exception of some public pages) require a positive permission to be shown, ie, you have to have a specific permission to show the page.

There are two constructs of the permission system.  An individual permission, and a group comprised of individual permissions.

## Individual Permissions

Most pages (unless public) have a title or header, which is the name of the individual permission.  **Add A Ride** for example. Individual permissions can be assigned by the underlying PHP code to anything in the system, they are not exclusive to just pages.

You can view all [individual permissions here](/Admin/allPermissions).

## Permission Groups

Permission Groups are primarily user defined groups of individual permissions.  Some permission group names are currently hard code for the code to work correctly.  For example, **Normal Member, Pending Member, Ride Leader** are all reserved names and should not be changed.

A permission group can not contain another permission group. It can only contain allowed and revoked individual permissions.

You can view all [permission groups here](/Admin/permissionGroups).

## Permissions for a specific user

You can grant a specific user permissions in two ways:

 * Assign a specific permission group.  The user will then have all the permissions in that group.  Recommended practice.
 * Assign a specific permission directly. Only recommended for special cases, ie. this person just needs "download rides as csv" and not full ride chair functionality.

You can also remove a permission for any group or person.  Good example is to prevent someone from abusing some feature (commenting on rides for example), but have the rest of the permissions they normally have.

You can see all the [permissions assigned to you here](/Admin/myPermissions).

## Final Permission Computation

When a user signs into the website, the system computes their currently assigned permissions by adding in all the individual permissions in all the groups they have been assigned.  It also adds in any individual permissions they may have been assigned.  The same permission may be in more than one group and it only counts as one permission. Permissions don't have levels or numbers, just yes or no.

Once the assigned permissions are computed, the system then subtracts any revoked permissions.  The permission could be revoked on a group (ie. the **Ride Leader** group should be set to revoke the **Become A Ride Leader**) or on an individual.

The final combinations of permissions are then stored with the user's session and will remain in effect until they sign out.  Any changes to a user's permissions will not take effect until they sign in again.

## Best Practice

The best practice is to think of users in terms of roles they play in the club. Name a permission group after the role, assign appropriate individual permissions to the group, then assign the group to people who are responsible for that role.

Good examples are roles would be **Treasurer, Newsletter Editor, Rides Chair, Event Coordinator, Volunteer Coordinator, Cue Sheet Coordinator**.  A permission group can be assigned to any number of users.

You then assign those groups to individual members.

