# Website Development Philosophy
The current state of PHP framework development is a sad state of affairs. Frameworks such as Laravel, Symfony, and Laminas (Zend) are overly complex, bloated and slow.  They require constant update maintenance to remain current, and in the end, they don't provide much support for writing a basic web app in PHP.

This project takes another approach of using best of class packages and a simple MVC framework that does not need constant update maintenance. See the Architecture documentation for details.

### Dependency Management
The general philosophy is to minimize dependencies where ever possible. This means if the code makes a request to the server, that code should handle the response from the server. This allows for better component modularization and leads to code with fewer dependencies between different sections of the code.

Another principle is use existing open source solutions (and contribute back when possible), but not all solutions are available in existing open source projects, so non-app specific code should be developed as if it could be pulled out of the code base and made open source. [See examples here](https://packagist.org/?query=phpfui).

This project uses [Composer](htts://packagist.org) to manage package dependencies.  See Architecture document for full details on how this is implemented. JavaScript libraries are generally used directly from open source projects, but a long term goal is to use a dependency manager to build and minimize them locally and then check the built components into git.

Dependencies are updated continuously. Major package revisions are migrated to as soon as possible.

All dependent code for the application is checked into git. This project does not use Composer on deploy. The only deployment dependency is GitHub, which must allow for a git pull.  There are no other deployment dependencies. Any code generation should be checked into git before deployment.

### Latest PHP features
Due to the constant improvements in PHP, this project will migrate to PHP as soon as any issues with a new PHP release are resolved, but generally no later than 2 months after the release of a new major version of PHP. Bug fixes for PHP should be deployed as soon as possible by your service provider.

This project will always encourage the use of types where ever possible. New language features supporting better types should be employed everywhere.  This means typed properties, typed arguments and return types should be used where ever possible.  New PHP feature usage is encouraged, as is migrating code to the latest PHP constructs where possible.

### PHP Style
All PHP files must start with **&lt;?php**, no exceptions. The use of the **?>** end PHP tag is prohibited.

Include or require directives are not allowed in general, except for stand alone script files, the autoloader or settings type objects.  This includes views or other subsystems that implement include type structures or concepts.

### Code Style
The project uses [Whitesmiths](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indentation_style#Whitesmiths_style) indentation. It has the least number of rules for consistent indentation. Tabs are used at the beginning of a line for indentation only, and spaces are used to after the first character of code on any line.  Tabs are not allowed after the first non tab character.  This keeps things consistent and allows individual developers to work with a comfortable indentation rather than dictating the code indentation that is forced by spaces.

Use **codestyle.bat** under Windows to conform to the latest coding standards.  Use an equivalent under OSX or Linux.

### Errors and warnings
This project takes a weed free lawn approach to errors and warnings.  No errors or warnings are tolerated. This means any error or warning is possibly a problem and should be investigated before it becomes a problem for a large number of users. While some errors are unavoidable due to resource issues, all errors and warnings should be fixed (and not suppressed) as soon as they are seen.  Use of error suppression is discouraged but may be used when no other option exists.

### Documentation
All reusable library type code should be documented to the best open source current practices. Please avoid useless comments such as ***@param int id*** with no comment.  You should specify the type on the parameter, so the comment is redundant and does not add value to the code. Either supply a meaningful comment or remove the DocBlock. This is a common PHP newbie mistake.  Application specific code should be commented when things may not be obvious to what or why something is being done. Otherwise proper class, method and variable naming should be employed to minimize the need for comments.

Super clever ultra compact code is frowned on.  Code should be simple and direct to avoid the need for extensive comments.

### Dependency Elimination and Reduction
Standard MVC frameworks introduce a huge number of dependencies, even though they claim to reduce dependencies (mostly through dependency injection of data into the views from the controller), in practice they create way more dependencies then they remove.

Let's take a standard example used by most MVC frameworks, a time control.

As we all know, standard HTML time fields are not displayed consistently between browsers, or even between the same browsers on different OSes.  Even worse, often the time control supplied natively by the browser is just simply a bad UI experience.  So any good website will try to provide a better time entry experience than the default browser UI control.

Unfortunately this involves adding the world's worst programming language, JavaScript, to the page.  Now since you are probably using a time control on more than one page, you will use a library you found in some package manager, or you wrote yourself if you have special requirements.  So now you have just introduced a dependency into your system.  Did you catch the dependency you just added?  The requirement for a JavaScript file to be included!  But wait, it gets worse. Your JavaScript library probably needs some custom CSS or even HTML to work properly, as it may not be able to deal with just a vanilla input type of time.  So now you have just introduced two more dependencies!

So what to do?  Since time fields are relatively common in most apps, many developers just decide to add all the JavaScript, CSS and HTML to every page, even though all pages don't have times on them.  This makes it easier to add new times to pages if you know all the boiler plate stuff is already included.  Unfortunately this is not a great approach, as it adds a larger payload to your page and requires more work (and slower performance) from the browser.

The other approach is to add the JavaScript, CSS and HTML on an as needed basis.  While this is better than the above approach for performance reasons, how may times have you found something that did not work as expected in production simply because someone forgot to include something and it was not caught in testing?  Yeah, too many times!

And the problem with all of this is, what happens when your product visionary decides they have just found the most awesome time control ever?  Using the former approach, you may be lucky if you can just replace some JavaScript and CSS, but the new time control may require some HTML tweaks for each input type of time.  In the later case, you are worse off, as you have to make the JavaScript and CSS changes on every view.  In both cases, changing a time control is hours or days worth of work, and even more testing.  And how many times have you done this and still found an old time control in production?  Yeah, thought so.

So what is the solution?  Simple, views need to be responsible themselves for things they need. How do we accomplish this?  Well, first of all, who actually knows what the view requires?  The view itself!  Second of all, who else cares what the view does?  Nobody! Everyone else is concerned with their own issues.  So this looks like the ideal place where you could use an object that knows what it needs to output to make things work, and is not impacted by anything else in the system.

### The PHPFUI solution
The basis of [PHPFUI](http://www.phpfui.com) is to provide building blocks to construct valid html pages. The basic concept is every object created with [PHPFUI](http://www.phpfui.com) has properties that relate to the type of object it is and that the object is a container that can hold other objects.

For example, the [PHPFUI\Page](/System/docs?n=PHPFUI&c=Page) is a representation of an HTML page.  You can add JavaScript, CSS and HTML to the page.  The page will then display the page correctly in the order you added objects to it.

And back to our time example, the [PHPFUI\Input\Time](/System/docs?n=PHPFUI\Input&c=Time) object takes a page object because it probably has to add at least some JavaScript to the page.  It could also add CSS, or create some custom HTML if needed.  In addition, the object constructs with the name of the input field, a label and an initial value.

The end result is only pages with times will have time specific JavaScript, CSS, or HTML added to them.  We have now removed a dependency of our views to add code to make times work.

In addition, since we now have all time display / input logic in one place, when the product visionary decides on a new time control, we only have to change one file in one place as long as we maintain the contract assumed by the class (you want an editable time control here).  And even better, a quick switch out of the time class (or by adding product flags) you can quickly switch time input control system wide for AB comparisons.  How easy was that? And if you want to get really fancy, it is super easy to display the native time control for browsers and OSes that have good built in time controls.  Plus, if a browser ups its game, it is easy to add native support for that browser at any point.  Try doing all that in some MVC template based framework without pulling your hair out.

### Avoiding Callback Dependency Hell
Another dependency that traditional MVCs encourage is the separation of the view with the back end that processes anything the view throws at the server.  While this may seem exactly one of the prime strengths of an MVC (separation of view and back end processes), it actually creates unneeded dependencies.  For example the front end needs to know what the back end is expecting and the back end needs to know what the front end is expecting in return. Often these are in two separate files, and probably in two different languages!  Talk about dependencies!  And what binds them together so that each knows what the other is doing?  Well actually nothing but developer expectations.  As the front end, I expect when I make a specific request to the back end, it will return what I expect in the format I want.  And as the back end, I can process what the front end sends, but am I getting all the information, and what should I send back?

In a traditional MVC framework, all of these front to back end dependencies are all "prayer" based.  I "pray" that what I am sending is what should be sent, and I "pray" that what I receive is what I expect.  Same for the back end. So for every transaction, we have four different "prayers" that need to be satisfied in order to have things work. And of course we know the front and back ends can be maintained by different people or even teams, so the "prayers" have to be sent through multiple people, and possibly different continents and languages (human or computer). A recipe for disaster and a nightmare to maintain or enhance.

Sure, I could add an additional layer of specification to the request, but do I really want that overhead?  And in the end, what can it really do, log an issue? Sure, it helps debugging, but do I want debugging turned on in a production system. I think not.

So how do we solve this seemingly intractable problem?

### Catch What You Throw
The solution is simple.  Just catch what you throw!  Just as we reduced dependencies with what is required for a UI component (the component decides what it needs), we can apply the same logic to components that need to call back to the server.  Since the component knows what it sends, it knows what to receive, and it knows what to throw back and then how to catch it!

The problem with most MVC frameworks is separation of requests. While this sounds like the exact point of on MVC, it actually enforces a problem, mainly you have separated the front end from the back end, but in reality, they both depend on each other!  Ideally you don't want to depend on anyone else. That is the whole idea of reducing dependencies, don't depend on other things, do what you need yourself!

Now you are saying to yourself, this is exactly antithetical to everything I have been told for years.  Exactly!  What says all of the computer science from 1950 is what you should replicating today?  Nothing.  If that were the case, you would still be driving a Model T (it was a great car for the time, but times have changed).

So in a completely object oriented approach to web design, we would design objects that stand alone as fully functional objects able to handle what ever they require of themselves and not have them reliant on our good graces and prayers to make sure they have everything they need to function.

### Putting It All Together
While it is easy to understand adding all dependencies to the page you want to output, in the case of a time control, is it a little less obvious on how to handle both the view and the back end in one object.

Let's take as look at a simple implementation of an Auto Complete input field.  We want to type a few characters, query the database, and return a small subset of matches that the user can pick from, or continue to type to further refine their search.  Take a look at this [Auto Select for countries](http://phpfui.com/Examples/AutoComplete.php). You can type in any phrase, and it calls the back end to return matches. Since the default number of characters that need to be entered before any results are returned is set to 3, try typing 3 or more characters to see what is suggested. The default could easily be changed, since AutoComplete is a class, you could change that behavior (or any other) by calling ***addAutoCompleteOption('minChars', 1)*** on the object.

But since we want to control both the front and back end, what do we really need to specify for this to work? Quite simply the control needs a callback to call when a request is made on the server side. The callback takes the parameters it is passed, queries the database, and returns the results.  Sounds simple enough, but how does it all work?

With any web request, there are two types of methods, GET and POST.  GET simply returns data from the server, but does not change it, and POST is used to (possibly) change data on the server.  The AutoComplete class uses this to present one interface that handles both calls.  On GET, the UI control is returned with all the associated JavaScript, header files, etc. that are needed for the UI control to work.  When it receives a POST command, it knows it is being call back (by itself) and must return data that the UI side is requesting.  Once it retrieves the data through the callback routine, it simply formats it the way the UI side of the control is expecting, and returns it as the page response.  In this way, the AutoComplete control is both a front end component and a back end component.  It switches behavior based on the request method and data passed to it via the request.

In order to do this successfully and play nice with other components that may want to handle their requests on the same page, a well behaved component needs to have some sort of identity in the request so it knows to respond to the request. Generally this can be the HTML id, which should be unique to the page, but can also include the field name, which should be supplied by the developer and be unique as well.  A combination of both of these would surely be unique.  If the control detects its own request, then it should respond to the request and pass back the correct information.

This **"Catch What You Throw"** technique may seem a bit confusing to first time users, but it helps to remember there are two sides of every web page.  One side is what is currently displayed in the browser, the other side is what is being processed on the back end.  Remember, both exist at the same time.  The web page is served first.  Since it is a GET command, the UI control just returns the HTML, CSS and JavaScript needed to make that control work on the browser.  Now the web page exists running in the browser.  When the user interacts with the control, the control sends requests to the server to the same URI with a POST command.  But since the URI is the same that created the page to begin with, it will execute the same code on the server side as it did to render the page initially.  But with one difference.  Instead of returning HTML, the control realizes it is being called back (by looking at the method, POST, in most cases) and it knows to return data to itself (now living in the client's browser).  And since the control knows what it sent to itself and what it expects back from itself, we don't have to rely on the four "prayers" to make sure we send and get back what we want, as it is all in the same piece of code.

And now we have just eliminated a bunch of dependencies and have made the view code simpler, because all we need to know is how to place the controls into the view.  The control itself handles its own requests how ever it wants.  So instead of a front end page, and a back end method, we simply have a front end page that also returns back end data to itself.

And now you have UI code that is totally independent of what ever page it is placed on.  And while the object itself might be a bit complicated to handle all this, the developer does not have to know anything about the internals, just the object interface, and that greatly simplifies the logic and complexity of the application.

And that is how you reduce dependencies to almost nothing while achieving less complexity.
