
# Windows Install
While this website runs under Linux, OSX or really any stack that supports a webserver, MySQL compatible DB, and modern PHP, it is developed and initially testing on Windows.  This is a setup guide for a Windows machine.

## Windows Requirements
- 64 bit machine, modern Windows version (10 or 11 or higher). May work on a 32 bit machine. YMMV.
- Good amount of disk space
- Good amount of memory (16 GB, but will probably run OK on 8)
- Basic knowledge of subdirectories, files, browsers, internet downloads, installing programs, pathing, etc. If you don't understand this, you can not do an install.

## Basic Steps
1. Install WAMPServer
2. Install git
3. Make sure git and PHP are pathed for command line usage
4. Create working directory
4. Clone Repo
6. Set up WAMPServer hosts
7. Install MySQL Workbench
8. Create database config files
9. Restore or initialize DB
10. Test setup

## Detailed Steps

### Install WAMPServer
- Download and install the latest version of [WAMPServer](https://wampserver.aviatechno.net/) to match your OS.
- Apply latest updates as well.

### Install git
- Download and install [git](https://git-scm.com/download/win) (the version control system, it has to be named something, so it is call 'git')

### Make sure git and PHP are pathed for command line usage
- Make sure git is correctly pathed for command line usage (Typing "git" at a command line shows you a page of documentation). You may need to reboot.
- Make sure PHP is correctly pathed for command line usage (Typing "php -v" at a command line shows you a version of PHP).
- PHP version needs to be at least the minimum supported version of PHP for the repo.  Highest version installed on your machine is preferred.
- PHP is generally installed in a path that looks like this 'c:\wamp64\bin\php\php8.2.7'

### Create Working Directory
The website will run out of any directory, but Windows has path length limits, so it is best not to place it 30 levels down in some weird ass "My Documents" directory that you can never figure out where it lives.

Try something like this from a command prompt on the drive with sufficient space:

  cd \
  md websites
  cd websites

### Clone the Repo
After above directory creation and you are in that directory, clone the repo:
```
git clone https://github.com/phpfui/BicycleClubWebsite2023.git
```
This will create a BicycleClubWebsite2023 directory in the websites directory.

cd into BicycleClubWebsite2023.  This is your basic working directory for the website. Feel free to clone other repos in the website directory, but do not do so in the BicycleClubWebsite2023 directory.

### Setup WAMPServer hosts
- From the Windows icon tray (bottom right, hover over the up caret "^"), click the green WAMP Server icon.
- Pick "**Your Virtual Hosts**", then "**Virtual Host Management**"
- You can host multiple local website with WAMPServer. We need to create one for our purposes.
- In the field "**Name of the Virtual Host**" you should put the server name you want to use.  Your club initials would be a good choice.  You will access the local website at http://YOURCHOSENNAME.
- In the field "**Complete absolute path of the VirtualHost folder**" you should put your file path, then /BicycleClubWebsite2023/www.  Be sure to include the drive in the path.
- Check the box "**If you want to use PHP in FCGI mode**" then select the highest version of PHP available.
- Hit the create button.  You will then need to "**Restart DNS**".
  - Icon Tray, right click WAMP Server icon, pick "**Tools**", then "**Restart DNS**" at the top.

### Install MySQL Workbench
Install [MySQL Workbench](https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/workbench/) and run.  Use below credentials (in PHP code) to connect to WAMP Server MySQL install.

### Create Database in MySQL Workbench
- Once you have connected to the MySQL server, right click on left hand **SCHEMAS** column. Select "**Create Schema**".
- Enter your database name you want (probably should be the same as your virtual host name for simplicity).
- Accept defaults and create.

### Create database config files
Since database credentials can not be stored in the repo, you need to create DB credentials for each database / website you want to run on your machine.
In the config directory, you should create a DB.php file (case sensitive file name!) with the following contents:

```php
<?php

return [
  'driver' => 'mysql',
  'host' => 'localhost',
  'user' => 'root',
  'password' => '',
  'dbname' => 'XXX',
  'port' => '3306',
  'stage' => 21,
  'setup' => false,
  'charset' => 'utf8mb4',
  'collation' => 'utf8mb4_general_ci',
  'timeZone' => 'America/New_York',
];
```

- You should replace XXX with your database name (from previous step).
- You might want to use a different [timeZone](https://www.php.net/manual/en/timezones.php) as well.
- The defaults for server name and passwords should work for WAMPServer, but change if needed.

This will create the default database for your setup. Others can be setup as well, but a more advanced setup.

### Restore DB or create new
- Place backup.gz in the BicycleClubWebsite2023 directory
- Run restore script (not case sensitive):
```
php oneOffScripts\restoreDB.php
```
This should restore the DB.

To create a new DB:

- Edit the config file above and delete the lines after 'port'.

### Run website locally
Browse to http://YOURCHOSENNAME

If you have chosen a new DB, you will need to run through the setup wizard.

### Testing emails locally
- Download and install the [Test Mail Server Tool](https://toolheap.com/test-mail-server-tool/)
- Click on the icon to start.  When the website sends an email, it will go to this server and open an email window with the email
- You will need a client email program.  [Thunderbird](https://www.thunderbird.net/) is recommended.

## Helpful PHP Scripts
All the following PHP scripts are in the oneOffScripts folder:
- restoreDB.php restores backup.gz to default database, or pass db name as parameter
- migrate.php runs the latest migrations on default database, or pass db name as parameter and migration level desired (defaults to latest)
