
## Setup / Technical
(note references to [IONOS](http://aklam.io/hYjVgX) are the recommended hosting service for this site)

**Where can I find the source code for BikeClubWebsite on GitHub?**
[On GitHub](https://github.com/phpfui/BicycleClubWebsite2023)

**While running setup, I got the ClusterFk page ("this is a real cluster *$#&!€" with piled up bicycles). What is the error that creates this message?**
The cluster page shows the error, but it is black text in a black background. So select stuff on the page and you should see the error message.

**What version of PHP should the site be running?**
"I don't fool around with old PHP versions, rim brakes or mechanical shifting!" says developer Bruce Wells. Choose the latest release of PHP.

**How do I set up the Cron job for BikeClubWebsite?**
Here is an [excellent tutorial on setting up cron jobs](https://www.howtogeek.com/101288/how-to-schedule-tasks-on-linux-an-introduction-to-crontab-files/) on Linux. Or you can set up the cron from the [IONOS](http://aklam.io/hYjVgX) dashboard.

You can see all of the tasks in the Cron job on the menu under System -> Cron Jobs. This screen will also let you disable individual tasks, if needed. This is a shortcut: [Cron Jobs](/System/cron)

**When I click on the "people icon" next to a list event (the icon with the count of registrants next to it) I get duplicate amounts for couples (that is a member who has registered one or more guests). For example, for a $60 per person event, both of the registrants will say $120 instead of $60 each.**
The system overstates the amount paid on this one screen, because the payment is for the entire group, not just the person. This screen shows everyone who has registered including people who haven't paid yet (because they ditched in the middle of the PayPal process). DO NOT depend on this screen for correct dollar amounts for each event. Instead, use the report that is generated at the top of this page when you click the Download Signup Sheet button.

**Are there database backups? Where are they located?**
Backups are located in the root directory of the project on the server or in the folder that sits above BicycleClubWebsite2023.

You should download or off load backups on a regular basis as a precaution should the event that the [IONOS](http://aklam.io/hYjVgX) site ever be disrupted.

**How To Restore MySQL database DB backups to [IONOS](http://aklam.io/hYjVgX)**
By downloading the restore file, you can manually restore your database.
```
    Open the page phpMyAdmin.
    Select Import.
    Select the recovery file (example: dbs14679849_2025-08-25.sql.gz.)
    If necessary, customize the recovery options.
    Start the import with OK.
```
Your data is now restored from the backup copy.

## Permissions
**Why aren't permissions working?**
The app needs to update files in the Websites/BikeClubWebsite/BicycleClubWebsite2023/www/ directory.

You need to set the public root directory in Apache:

Websites/BikeClubWebsite/BicycleClubWebsite2023/www/

**I just made permissions changes but they don't seem to have stuck. Why?**
You need to sign out and back in to see permission changes.  You can also reset for everyone under System > [Permission Reloader](/System/permission) which can rebuild all of the existing permissions if something doesn't seem to be working correctly.

Also: You need to have the top level menu items enabled, or the menu does not show up and it looks like nothing works.

**I am getting this message for a user group after I have upgrade their group permissions: 'You do not have the correct permissions to view this page. You need the Home - Home Page permission.'**
BikeClubWebsite needs write permission in the www directory to update user permissions. If it doesn't have that privilege, the permissions you have added to the group won't take on the individual users. You need to enable all file permissions for BicycleClubWebsite2023 directory and all subdirectories and files.

Things will not work if the file permissionLoader.php in the BicycleClubWebsite2023 directory is missing (it's used to load permissions to validate against). If it is missing it's confirmation that you haven't granted write permission to this directory

## Email
**Why aren't my club email address running correctly?**
The system email addresses rely on [cron.php](/cron.php) running correctly. I think you are set up correctly, but cron is not. Check and let me know if that is the issue. You will probably need to check[IONOS](http://aklam.io/hYjVgX) system logs  Once that is working, the site will function better.

Also, set up the server with a wildcard in front of the @ sign (as in *@YourDomain.com). This will forward all emails received to the BikeClubWebsite, where the app will then match it to president@YourDomain.com, secretary@YourDomain.com, via Club [Email Addresses](/Admin/clubEmails)  The * is a catch all email address, and all emails go to that one inbox, then the system processes it from there and sends it where it needs to go, including[ Forums](/Forums/manage).

The emailAnnouncements column in the members table controls who will get sent an email. If it's true (emailAnnouncements=1) then the member will be included in this distribution. You can change the default for new users [Here](/Membership/Configure/configure)

You can preview the email and the number of emails that the system will send by clicking "Send Reset Email To You" under Membership -> [Email All Members](/Membership/emailAll). The email will not go to all members unless you click the "Force Email To All Members" checkbox.

## Paypal
**How does BikeClubWebsite work with PayPal?**
Invoices are generated for all PayPal transactions. The invoice record is populated with the **memberId** for members. Non-members get a customer record. The **memberId** is set to the negative value of the **customerId**.

**How do you set up PayPal to work with BikeClubWebsite?**
PayPal has a "**sandbox**" mode, where you can generate real transactions that are fed to PP but that do NOT result in PayPal transactions (that is, no money changes hands).

Here is where you do that: [PayPal Settings](/Finance/payPal)

FYI, real credit card numbers will work in Sandbox mode. Don't forget to hit SAVE after entering in the PayPal credentials into BikeClubWebsite.

## Events
**How do you add a +1 to an Event Registration after the member has already paid for their registration?**
Go to Events --> Manage All Events and then click on the icon of the people to get to the list of all registrants. Then click the button at the top of the list that says, "Add Reservation."

Fill in all of the info you have for the +1, including name and email address. You will have to manually request the +1 submit a payment and then update the payment information for the added attendee. You *might* be able to go into PayPal to send a Request For Payment.

## Texting
**Can the site support text messaging?**
Yes. Sign up for a Twilio account if you want to enable it. You can do a starter account for $20 with auto renew.  Texts are cheap. $20 will probably last you a few months or more.  You can text all riders on a ride from the web site and send your geo location as well.  Great for when you are off the ride.  Or text an individual member who is lost with your location.  Nice stuff.

Twilio's cost per text message is .0083 cents. You could send one text blast to 430 club members for $3.57.

## Membership
**Can we set a default to hide personal information (including phone numbers and home address) during member directory searches?**
You can set the privacy defaults for new members [here](/Membership/Configure/configure).

New users can always override these defaults under [Membership/My Info](/Membership/myInfo) to display this info.

Admin users can see the info that is hidden from regular club members through the [Membership/Find Members](/Membership/find) feature.

**A new member has signed up and paid their membership fee. But when they try to login and use the "members" site, they receive a 'no permission to view this page' message.**
This happens if the member hasn't clicked the box to accept the waiver. You can confirm this in a few different ways: Their permissions are set to 'normal member'  and 'Pending member' (when they check the box, they will be only a 'normal member') Additionally, you can look at their member profile, by clicking Admin, and confirm that they have paid. To see what they are seeing, click the Login As under Admin in their member profile.

**How can I get a quick snapshot of membership, including new members, expirations and renewals without running a bunch of reports?**
Go to to Membership -> [Club Statistics](/Membership/statistics)
Other options:
[Membership Roster](/Membership/rosterReport)
[New Members](Membership/newMembers)
